Perl Tools for Chado

Note

These tools are unsupported - I really just wrote them for my own use,
feel free to download and play with them, just don't base any critical
code on them, because they are liable to change at any time. 

Modules Required

In addition to some standard CPAN modules, you will need the following:
XML::NestArray

This is a module I wrote for dealing with nested array / tree
datastructures that uses XML. It also has a native indented text
format, that I find preferable for viewing/editing in emacs. 
This will eventually be uploaded to CPAN, but for now you can get it
from the BDGP CVS Repository, check out the project
scratch/xml-nestarray. 

Bio::XML

This is a module for dealing with biological data (such as features)
as nested arrays/xml. This may eventually go into bioperl, but it is
different from the bioperl approach, as it is emphatically not object
oriented. The core of the code is just a series of transforms in
Bio::XML::Sequence::Transform; for instance, inferring UTR from exons;
inferring splice sites; inferring coordinates of composite features
(eg transcripts) from the coordinates of leaf features (eg exons);
coordinate transformations.

In addition to being a relational database, Chado will also need a
Domain Logic Layer. This is one example of how that layer may
look. Other alternatives include SQL (views and procedures), XSLT and
an Object Oriented layer. My personal views are fairly anti-OO these
days, but that's just me. 

Bio::XML is checked into the chado repository, right here, see
chado/src/test/perl. 

Tools

After all that, there's really just one tool so far:

fgraph

This draws a network graph diagram showing Chado data. Right now it
works if you feed it XML::NestArray style indented text or XML. The
XML it expects will probably differ from official Chado XML, it uses a
schema transformation I find useful. Eventually it should all be in
sync.
 
For an example of the graph images produced, see Sequence Module examples 
or Comp Analysis Module examples

This tool requires GraphViz from CPAN.

Chris Mungall Last modified: Tue Nov 12 18:15:31 PST 2002
