# $Id: README,v 1.5 2007-04-13 02:13:42 briano Exp $

chaos-xml/README

Refer to the INSTALL file for installation instructions.

                               Chaos-XML Library

Introduction

   The Chaos-XML Library contains software and specifications for the
   Chaos XML format. Chaos XML is for representing sequences and sequence
   features.

   Chaos is a mapping of the chado relational schema into a hierarchical
   (ie XML) model. Chaos XML can be used in conjunction with a Chado
   database, or it can be used entirely independently of Chado or any
   database. Of course, the Chado database may be used entirely
   independently of Chaos XML.

   This directory contains perl scripts, modules and XSL transforms for
   extracting chaos from various datasources, and for manipulating and
   transforming chaos documents.

   Chaos-XML is the annotation format for CGL.

Status

   This software and data format will be officially released on Jun 1
   2005. Until then that time it is to be considered alpha software.

Downloading and Installation

   You can either download the latest stable release, or fetch the
   bleeding-edge latest version from CVS.

Download stable release

   This is recommended for most users.

   The current latest release is Bio-Chaos-0.01. Download this and
   follow the instructions in the INSTALL file.

Obtain from CVS

   See http://wiki.gmod.org/index.php/Chaos_XML for details. Chaos-XML
	is part of the gmod-schema project, see gmod/schema/chado/chaos-xml

Motivation

   The chaos format arose out of a need for an annotation data exchange
   format within the BDGP. We needed an XML format that would be
   compatible with the richness of annotation data that could be
   represented in a Chado database. We also need a format that we (BDGP)
   had direct control over, so that we could make minor modifications as
   required.

   We created chaos-xml as an almost direct mapping of a pre-1.0 Chado
   database. The idea was that there would be no *semantic* mapping
   required between chado and chaos, purely a *syntactic* XML to
   relational mapping. A summary of the differences between Chado and
   Chaos are listed further on in this document.

   At around the same time the main chado software development team at
   FlyBase devised the official Chado XML format. Chado XML and Chaos XML
   are semantically very similar, but they are different in how the XML
   to relational database mapping is performed. Chado XML is also
   considerably more verbose than Chaos XML. This is because Chaos uses
   some denormalisations of the Chado model, explained below. In our view
   these two formats are complementary. Conversions between the formats
   should be trivial [TODO: XSL mapping].

The Chaos Model

   For full documentation on the Chaos XML datamodel see the dtd
   directory. Elements in Chaos XML will generally have an equivalent
   table or column in the Chado relational schema. Thus the Chado
   documentation should also serve as documentation for the Chaos XML
   format.

   Briefly, Chaos (and Chado) are generic ontology-typed feature graph
   formats. This is similar to, but richer than, the GFF3 format.

   The central concept in Chaos/Chado is a "feature". A feature can
   represent any genomic or sequence entity that is typed by the
   Sequence Ontology (SO).

   Features are interconnected in a feature graph using the
   feature_relationship element. This is to indicate which exons and
   proteins belong to which transcript, which transcripts belong to which
   gene.

   The location of a feature, relative to another feature, is described
   by the featureloc element. All locations are interbase (ie counting
   from 0, not 1. It is the gaps between bases that are counted, not the
   bases themselves). In contrast to chado, which uses fmin/fmax to
   indicate the left and right coordinates, chaos use nbeg/nend to
   indicate the five prime (natural start) and three prime (natural end)
   coordinates.

   For more details, see the dtd/ directory

Differences between Chaos XML and the Chado Relational Database Schema

   Chaos-XML is based on the Chado relational model. For a full
   explanation of the meaning of the elements in Chaos-XML, please refer
   to the Chado documentation at wiki.gmod.org.

   For a full explanation of the differences, see http://gmod.org//Chaos_XML

Library Contents

   The Chaos-XML Library consists of specifications and software for
   dealing with Chaos-XML files.

DTD

   The DTD specification can be found in dtd/chaos.dtd

   Soon there will also be specifications as XML Schema and/or Relax-NG.

XSL Stylesheets

   XSL transformations can be found in the xsl/ directory.

Example Chaos XML

   Example Chaos-XML can be found in the sample-data/ directory.

 Scripts

   The scripts are in the bin/ directory. You need to install the
   perl chaos library before running these scripts.

 Chaos Perl Module

   You can browse the perl modules in the lib/ directory. To install,
   download the chaos-xml library and follow the instructions in the
   INSTALL file.

Converting between Chaos-XML and Chado-XML

   There are XSLT stylesheets defined for mapping between these two
   similar formats, see the xsl/ directory.

   If you are not familiar with XSLT, you can use these scripts, part of
   this distribution (see the bin/ directory):

     * cx-chaos2chadoxml.pl
     * cx-chadoxml2chaos.pl

Future Extensions

   As new modules are added to chado (for example, the genetics module
   and the phylogeny module), corresponding chaos-xml DTDs will be
   generated.

Questions and Further info

   For general info on the chado schema, see http://gmod.org/Chado

   Send questions/comments to this mail list:
   
   http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/gmod-schema


   Chris Mungall

